[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. In this video,
we're going to have an introduction to a very
big subject—the subject of what is a curve and,
more particularly, what is an algebraic curve. So,
we're going to start to investigate notions
that we're going to have to say a lot more
about in upcoming videos. I'm going to show you
some pictures, we're going to have a little bit
of historical discussion, and I want you to start
thinking about curves and the question: How should
we approach what a curve is? It's historically
a very interesting and problematic notion.
The motivation is that in the last half a dozen
videos or so, we've introduced what we might
call algebraic calculus. This is an approach to
calculus that is really oriented at a high school
student—it's very elementary, it doesn't involve
any notions of limits, of real numbers, or of
functions. For us, so far, this algebraic calculus
has been developed in the context of polynomials,
and it allows us to define and utilize Taylor
expansions, sub-derivatives, and to talk about
tangents. Tangents mean not just tangent lines
but also tangent conics and higher tangents.
A natural question that many of you probably have
is: Okay, that's good, that's interesting, but how
are we going to extend this algebraic calculus
to more general functions? For example,
those of you who have studied some mathematics
before, you've seen functions perhaps like this:
𝑥
−
+
x
−
+3
​
. You can think of that as a function of
𝑥
x according to the standard dogma, or
you could think of the square root of
𝑥
+
x
+1, or maybe
𝑥
x to the fifth, or perhaps the exponential
function combined with a circular function,
𝑒
tan
⁡
(
𝑥
)
e
tan(x)
. So, does this algebraic approach to calculus
work for these kinds of things? If so, how?
Some of you might also be wondering how we're
going to extend this elementary calculus to
go beyond functions to consider more general
curves—for example, conics or cubics. If you
are interested in an ellipse, for example, an
ellipse like this, perhaps you know that in the
standard formulation of things, an ellipse
like this has an equation involving both
𝑥
x and
𝑦
y, not just
y equals a function of
𝑥
x,
but a relation involving both
𝑥
x and
𝑦
y together. So, that's not really
a function because for any value of
𝑥
x, there's more than one associated value of
𝑦
y. But nevertheless, it's
a reasonable geometrical object. We might very
well want to know, for example, how to compute
a tangent and how to compute the slope of that
tangent at some point. Here's another example:
𝑥
−
𝑦
=
x
​
−
y
​
=1. That's a hyperbola. It's also
not a function in the usual sense,
but it's certainly a pleasant geometrical object.
I've also shown you a curve that is a little bit
more complicated—this one here
in red that has the equation
𝑥
+
𝑦
𝑥
=
x
+y
+3xy=0. It's called the folium
of Descartes. That's an example of a cubic curve,
and again, we might ask not just how to calculate
a tangent, but how do you calculate a tangent
conic at a point? And here's another one—this
one right here—that's given by an equation like
this, which is actually of degree four. So,
this is another question: Can we calculate
Taylor expansions of these things? Does it
make sense to talk about sub-derivatives?
Can we compute tangents, for example,
tangent lines, tangent conics, or maybe even
tangent cubics for higher-degree curves?
Alright, so what we're really asking here is: Is
there such a notion of algebraic calculus on an
algebraic curve? The idea being that these things
should be algebraic curves because ultimately they
are given by polynomials involving
𝑥
x and
𝑦
y. So, they're reasonably pleasant algebraic
objects—there should be a pleasant calculus
for them too. Of course, that brings
up the question: Well, what exactly are
we talking about here when we talk about
an algebraic curve? What does that mean?
So, let's have a historical look at
these questions by going back to the
ancient Greeks to start with and having
a look at what they were thinking about
in the context of curves. Greek mathematics
emphasizes the importance of the straightedge
and compass for making geometrical
constructions and, correspondingly,
the notions of line and circle as being the
fundamental curves or mathematical objects out
of which most other things are built. So, those
are the primary curves in Greek mathematics.
Then, sort of one level up, they discovered the
conic sections. The conic sections are obtained
by essentially combining the circle and the line
to get a cone. The cone is what you get when you
take a circle and then a point not in the plane
of that circle and draw all the lines from that
point to the various points on the circle—you
get a cone. And then the conic sections are
obtained by slicing that cone with a plane. If you
slice the cone with a plane in that orientation,
you get an elliptical cross-section. If you
slice it with a plane something like this,
then you cut both the top and the bottom parts
of the cone to get a hyperbolic cross-section,
or hyperbola. And then, sort of halfway
between these, poised between them,
is the case when the plane is just
parallel to one of the lines of the cone,
so it cuts the cone only in one of its
parts, and that way you get a parabola.
So, these are the three standard kinds of
conic sections, but there are, in fact,
degenerate ones as well. We could also consider
the case when the plane slices right through
this point here in such a way that it also,
say, slices through those two lines there,
forming an "X." So, a pair of intersecting
lines is also a conic section. In fact,
if we took a plane that went like this,
then we would be just picking up one line,
so one line—one might think of it as a doubled
line—is also a conic section. And the most
degenerate case is when you take a plane that just
slices the cone at its vertex there—then you're
only picking up a single point. So, this notion
of conic sections does have degenerate cases too.
These were well studied by Archimedes and
Apollonius prominently, and the ancient
Greeks learned a lot about them. But they also
considered quite a few other curves, some of
them very interesting. For example, Archimedes
introduced the idea of a spiral, and he thought
very mechanically, physically. He imagined a line
that was fixed at a point rotating uniformly about
that point—actually, sort of a ray, I guess—and
then imagined on that line a particle moving
linearly along that line at the same time that
the ray is rotating. Okay, so if the particle
starts there, then after a little while it's
here, and then it's there, sort of trying to
follow it roughly something like this. So you get
this spiral shape, which goes on indefinitely,
and he proved some very nice things about it.
These days it's most easily described in polar
coordinates using the radius and theta and has
a relatively simple equation in terms of those.
There's the cissoid of Diocles, which is
obtained from a circle, and here are two
perpendicular diameters of the circle. From this
point here, we go an equal arc in this direction
and in this direction. So, once we've gone equal
amounts in this direction and this direction,
we take the line perpendicular to
this diameter through that point,
and then we connect this point with that
point there to obtain the intersection right
there. As we change these two points,
making them wider or further apart,
then this intersection traces out a curve. If
we consider the corresponding pair up here,
we also get this part of the curve. The curve is
naturally extended—it really wants to keep going,
even though the construction doesn't do that for
us, but it wants to keep going. It turns out that
algebraically it has an equation like this: If
you put the origin at the center of the circle,
𝑦
(
𝑎
+
𝑥
)
=
(
𝑎
−
𝑥
)
y
(a+x)=(a−x)
, where
𝑎
a is the radius of the circle.
Then there was the conchoid of Nicomedes, which
was also around 200 BC, and it's also something
that's reasonably natural. It's also formed by
lines, so we have a fixed line there, we have
a fixed point here, and then we're considering
the various lines going through our fixed point,
and we're looking at going a fixed length
from the baseline on any one of these lines.
So, on any one of these lines, we then go a
fixed length in the direction from the line,
okay, and then these points trace out some
curve, which will sort of asymptotically
approach the line as we go out in that direction,
and that's the conchoid of Nicomedes. I think he
actually made a mechanical construction that
would actually draw this thing for you. So,
the ancient Greeks did think in terms of
mechanical constructions for their curves.
Another kind of curve that was considered are
the spheric sections, where you get a torus,
and a torus, or a donut, is what you get when you
take a circle and you rotate it around an axis.
So, this has a circular cross-section, and this is
also a circular direction here, so we're rotating
a circle around a circle to get a donut. And
then these spheric sections are the curves that
you get by slicing this donut with a plane, and
the various curves that you get depend very much
on where the plane is in relation to the donut.
You can get a pair of circles, or you get kind of
an oval shape, or a curve that kind of indents a
little bit, or a very interesting sort of special
case is when the curve is such that it crosses
there, and you get a sort of figure-8 curve.
Of course, ancient peoples were very interested in
astronomy, and in particular, figuring out what's
going on with the planets in the night sky. To
understand that, Ptolemy introduced the notion
of an epicycle, which is a curve that's formed
when one circle rotates about another circle,
and we're watching the image of a point. So,
if this point rotates, if the circle rotates,
then the trajectory of such a point is something
like this, looping around the bigger circle.
Alright, so the ancient Greeks had a variety of
curves that they were interested in, and they had
both a mechanical and geometrical understanding
of these curves. The next really important
development is in the time of the Europeans
around the 17th century with René Descartes and
his fundamental treatise La Géométrie, in which
he introduces the idea of algebraic coordinates
to deal with geometrical problems. It's from this
that we get our notion of Cartesian coordinates,
with an x-axis, a y-axis, equally spaced
labels along each axis, and the idea that
you can represent a curve by an equation,
and conversely, given an equation, you can
picture it by a curve. An absolutely fundamental
innovation and advance in mathematics—probably
in pure mathematics, perhaps one of the most
important innovations in the last 500 years.
Descartes realized that the power of this
point of view was that the algebra tells
you a lot about the curve, and you can calculate
purely algebraically instead of having to make
geometrical constructions. He realized that if
you took the simplest possible relation between
𝑥
x and
𝑦
y, namely a linear relation of the form
𝑎
𝑥
+
𝑏
𝑦
+
𝑐
=
ax+by+c=0, then you're getting a line,
and conversely, a line always has a linear
relation like this. And he would have been
very excited when he discovered that if you go up
one level to degree 2 curves—so you're considering
all equations of the form
𝑎
𝑥
+
𝑏
𝑥
𝑦
+
𝑐
𝑦
+
𝑑
𝑥
+
𝑒
𝑦
+
𝑓
=
ax
+bxy+cy
+dx+ey+f=0—and here these
numbers
𝑎
,
𝑏
𝑐
,
𝑑
𝑒
,
a,b,c,d,e, and
𝑓
f are all numbers. So if you consider that
kind of equation, then the corresponding point
(
𝑥
,
𝑦
)
(x,y) traces out a conic, and every conic can be
expressed in this form. So, this is an incredibly
exciting development—he could then see how to
prove pretty much everything that Apollonius
knew about conics by working with the algebraic
representation of them. He also saw that there's
a natural hierarchy of curves depending
on the degree—that's the linear degree 1,
that's quadratic degree 2—so there's a natural
progression of complexity of curves depending
on the degree. One can't underestimate
the importance of this development.
So, I think anybody who's mathematically minded
when they hear about this story naturally they're
going to ask, well, alright, if degree 2 curves
are the conic sections of the ancient Greeks,
what are the degree 3 curves? Absolutely natural,
obvious question—what do they look like? Well,
people were interested, of course, and Isaac
Newton, famous for many things, of course
including the development of the calculus and
the laws of motion, including resolution of the
conundrum of how the planets move, investigated
cubic curves with the idea of taking a general
cubic curve, which rather has this long,
intimidating structure. So it's a combination of
𝑥
,
𝑦
𝑥
,
𝑦
x
,x
y,xy
,y
, and then lower degree terms like
𝑥
,
𝑦
𝑥
x
,xy,y
,x and
𝑦
y, and just a constant. So, he took one of
those equations and said, well, if I graph that,
what am I going to get? What does it look
like? And he made various transformations
to try to get them into sort of standard
forms. Just as there are more or less three
conics—at least three non-degenerate conics—he
tried to analyze how many cubics there were,
and I think his list has some 70 or 80 in
it. It wasn't completely correct, but anyway,
the cubic story is much more involved than
the conic story, but still very interesting.
So, here's just some brief indication of what
cubics can look like. So, in black here, that's
a possible shape of a cubic. See, it actually has
two components, or it could look like this thing
here, or it could look like this with sort of a
cusp, or it could look like a bunch of branches,
maybe even with an isolated point, or it
could have even three branches like this.
There's quite a lot of possibilities for what
a cubic looks like, and of course, then there's
the corresponding question: Well, what about the
higher degree curves? Once we've understood cubics
more or less, what about quartics—fourth-degree
curves—or quintics—fifth-degree curves—and so
on? And I have to say that, of course, nowadays,
this is subsumed in algebraic geometry, but it's
a bit of a mystery to me why algebraic geometers
don't spend more time and energy explaining to
the rest of us what the answers to this natural
question are. I think it'd be lovely to have more
pictures of algebraic curves so we can see some
of the variety and the beauty of these objects.
Actually, there's a reason why they don't
do that, partially, but we'll get to that
later when we talk more about algebraic
geometry. But you can see here that, okay,
these kinds of curves that result
from thinking about the degree of a
polynomial in
𝑥
x and
𝑦
y in a Cartesian setting introduced by
Descartes—very reasonable, very natural,
perhaps very pleasant field of investigation. But
there's a lot more to curves than these things.
So, the 17th and 18th centuries saw a lot of work
and development of not just the algebraic curves
that we've been talking about, but also other
kinds of curves that had often a mechanical
formulation. For example, a catenary, which
is the shape formed by a hanging chain. So,
you get a chain and you hang it from two equally
spaced points—you get some kind of curve, and it's
natural to ask, what is the shape of that curve?
People thought maybe originally it was a parabola,
and it's maybe reasonably close to a parabola, but
it's actually a different curve called a catenary.
Another important curve that's related to motion
is what happens when you roll a circle on a
line—it's just like Ptolemy's epicycles except
that the rolling circle is rolling on a line
instead of a bigger circle. So, if we choose some
point on the circle and we follow its path as our
given circle rolls, it's going to form something
that looks like this—that's called a cycloid.
And that cycloid had a lot of remarkable
properties—it was not an algebraic curve,
but people eventually realized that it had
a lot to do with the laws of motion. So,
if you invert a cycloid—in other words, just
turn it upside down—instead of having a branch
like this, we have a branch like this, then
if we think of the motion of a particle,
like a ball rolling down that curve, this has
two very interesting properties. First of all,
it's what's called the tautochrone, meaning
equal time curve. And what that means is
that if you start the ball anywhere along
this curve, anywhere from here up to here,
and you drop it and let it roll down—assuming
there's no friction—then the amount of time
that it takes to get there is fixed. So, it takes
the same amount of time to roll down from the top
as it does from here or even from here. It's a
remarkable property of the inverted cycloid. And
then another property is the brachistochrone
property—that's actually the shortest time
curve. If you want to slide down a slide from this
point to this point and you consider all possible
curves between these two points, including, for
example, a straight line, which is an obvious or
a very primitive kind of slide, then it turns out
that exactly this inverted cycloid is the curve
that lets the ball go down fastest—anything
else that you choose will be slightly or much
slower. And the names associated with these
results are Huygens and Jacob Bernoulli,
Jacob being one of the many Bernoulli brothers
that played an important role in mathematics.
Alright, so the Europeans were very fascinated
by curves, and they had both an algebraic and
a mechanical orientation to them. But even
going back to the founder, to Descartes,
Descartes realized that one should make a
distinction—that there was something special
about the algebraic curves that were given by
polynomials. And he sort of had this division
into mechanical and geometrical—these days people
say algebraic versus transcendental, perhaps,
but it's more or less the same thing. So, the idea
that the algebraic curves given by polynomials
are in some sense more amenable to analysis and
investigation than these transcendental curves.
But still, it begs the question: What exactly are
we talking about here when we're talking about a
curve? So, it's a rather subtle question of
what exactly is a curve, and historically,
it's caused quite a lot of problems, and
there's been a lot of debate and a lot of
introspection and analysis of figuring out what
exactly we are talking about when we're talking
about a curve. It's easy enough to put our pen
down on paper and squiggle around a little bit
and get something and say, well, that's
a curve. But what exactly are we doing?
How are we mathematically modeling that?
What is allowed, and what is not allowed?
It's rather surprising that the modern
definition only really took place in
around the last part of the 19th century. In
the 1880s, Jordan gave this following modern
definition of a curve. He said that a curve is
a set of points taken on by a pair of continuous
functions
𝑥
=
𝑓
(
𝑡
)
,
𝑦
=
𝑔
(
𝑡
)
x=f(t),y=g(t) where
𝑡
t ranges through some interval on the real
line. Okay, I put "continuous function" here in
quotes—he would not have put it in quotes, but I
do because the notion of a continuous function is,
in fact, highly problematic, as
we'll see later on. But to Jordan,
he thought he knew what a continuous
function was, and so he thought, well,
this is what it is—it's just a pair
of continuous functions specifying the
𝑥
x and
𝑦
y coordinate of a point on the plane.
Okay, this is a very unfortunate
definition—it's a completely wrong idea,
it's very wrong thinking, and it's far too
simplistic, and it's logically just cheating,
as we'll see. But there was already evidence
shortly after Jordan gave his definition that
there was something fishy going on here.
Just a few years afterward, in 1890,
Peano gave an example where a curve, which is a
curve by Jordan's definition, had a remarkable,
in fact almost absurd, quality. So, he showed
that you could cook up two continuous functions,
𝑓
(
𝑡
)
f(t) and
𝑔
(
𝑡
)
g(t), which purportedly took the
interval from 0 to 1 onto the square in such a way
that it was one-to-one and onto and continuous.
That means that there's actually a bijection,
so this curve, which is not like this—this is
some kind of simplistic rendition of it—but
this curve, whatever it is, takes every point
here to every point here in a one-to-one way,
so that the curve as the set of points obtained
is actually the unit square. So, according to
Jordan's definition, the unit square is a curve.
Okay, so most people, when looking
at this example, would say, alright,
well that just proves that the definition is
wrong. If I have a definition of a circle,
for example, and we ultimately decide that a
lemniscate is a circle according to my definition,
then the natural deduction is that my definition
is not a very good one—that we should forget
about it and try something else. That would
have been the natural deduction to make from
Peano's example. And then other people gave other
examples, including Hilbert. But convenience took
precedence over logical clarity. These days, the
definition of a curve is more or less this one,
except that people have changed their tune just
slightly to say, okay, the curve is not actually
the image, it's actually the pair of functions,
so the pair of functions is the curve. But still,
Peano's curve is still a curve in the modern
definition. Students are usually not shown
this in an introductory calculus class
because it's a little bit embarrassing,
just as it was embarrassing in the last part of
the 19th century. A lot of embarrassing things
happened in the last part of the 19th century, by
the way, okay? Things that are still casting their
shadow over modern mathematics—we're
going to talk a lot more about them.
So, if the notion of a curve is perhaps
at this point too ambitious, perhaps we
should scale down our intentions and try to
do something more modest. Why don't we stick
with algebraic curves just the way Descartes
urged us to do? That's much more amenable,
much more treatable with logical clarity,
and there's a natural way forward going
back to Descartes and Newton and
the pioneers of the subject. So,
an excellent way of starting to think about
curves is by using the framework of bipolynomials.
Let me remind you that a bipolynomial is a
two-dimensional version of a polynomial—it's
a rectangular array of numbers, and most of the
time we'll be using examples where the numbers are
integers. So, here, for example, 1, 2, 0, 3, -1,
4, 3. And if you like, you can think of zeros as
occupying these other points; I'm just too lazy
to write them down. And this has an alternate
expression in terms of alphas and betas, so
roughly oriented the same way here. This is
+
𝛽
−
𝛼
+
𝛽
𝛼
1+2β+0β
+3β
−α+4αβ+3α
, so increasing powers of
𝛼
α in this direction and betas in this direction.
We would write this more usually just in a linear
fashion:
+
𝛽
−
𝛼
+
𝛽
𝛼
1+2β+3β
−α+4αβ+3α
. So, whether we're talking about this
as a polynomial in alpha and beta or this thing as
a bipolynomial, it's pretty much the same thing.
Now, to connect it to the discussion we've
just been having, we can replace alpha with
𝑥
x and beta with
𝑦
y, for example, to get an equation. So,
associated with this, we can say, oh, we can just
think about this equation—this equation is somehow
intimately connected with this bipolynomial. So,
some examples: The folium of Descartes, which is a
cubic, has this equation—it can be associated with
the bipolynomial or bipolynomial right here. So,
this represents the
𝑥
x
, this represents the
𝑦
y
, this represents the
𝑥
𝑦
3xy as a bipolynomial. It's
𝛼
+
𝛽
𝛼
α
+β
+3αβ. So, in other words,
whether we're studying this thing or whether we're
studying this thing, maybe they're pretty close,
maybe they're somehow connected—maybe we
can think about what this is as being this.
So, here are two other examples: the lemniscate of
Bernoulli, which is this sort of figure-8 shaped
thing here, has this traditional equation
(
𝑥
+
𝑦
)
=
(
𝑥
−
𝑦
)
(x
+y
)
=2(x
−y
), and what that means is that the points that are
lying on here are exactly the points that satisfy
that equation. Well, we can expand that out if
we want to and bring everything to one side,
then we get an expression of degree four in
𝑥
x and
𝑦
y, and if we prefer to use
alphas and betas, we can replace
𝑥
x and
𝑦
y with alphas and betas,
and then we can say, aha, what we've got
here is just a bipolynomial—it looks like
this. There's a 1 for the
𝛼
α
, one for the
𝛽
β
, here's the
𝛼
𝛽
2α
β
term, the minus
𝛼
𝛽
2α
β
, and the plus
𝛽
𝛼
2β
α
.
Here's another example: the Fermat curve,
𝑥
+
𝑦
=
x
+y
=1. Well, if we bring everything
to the other side, it's sort of like
𝛼
+
𝛽
−
α
+β
−1, which can be represented
by a bipolynomial like this, and
its graph looks something like this.
Now, there are all kinds of subtleties involved
here. This is just an introductory talk—we haven't
actually yet pinned any proper definitions
down. I just want to get some examples out
there on the table—these are the kinds of
objects that we would like to consider. Now,
there's all kinds of subtleties, however. For
example, it's a famous theorem of Fermat that
this particular curve actually only has two
rational points on it—the only pairs of numbers
𝑥
x and
𝑦
y which are rational numbers are these
ones here that lie on the curve: (1, 0), that's
there, and (0, 1). So, what am I actually drawing
when I draw this? That's a good question. Modern
mathematicians will say, oh, I'm drawing real
numbers—I'm drawing all the non-rational solutions
of this thing, the irrational solutions of this,
all properly in quotes. Well, that's highly
debatable, and we're going to talk about that.
But the same question arises here—can we actually
find points that lie on this equation? It's
one thing to write down an equation and
say, alright, we're going to look at all
those points
(
𝑥
,
𝑦
)
(x,y) that satisfy the equation, but how do you
actually go about finding some solutions? You see,
this is very different from the situation
when we were graphing polynomials. There,
we had a polynomial
𝑃
P, and we just graphed all the points
(
𝑥
,
𝑃
(
𝑥
)
(x,P(x)), so we are
guaranteed to get points because we start with
𝑥
x and then we plug
x into
𝑃
P and we get the
𝑦
y coordinate. This is much different because the
𝑥
x and
𝑦
y are intermixed here,
and we don't have them in the form
𝑦
=
y= something, so you
can't immediately generate solutions to this. It's
highly non-obvious, and it's highly difficult in
many examples to actually come up with points
that actually lie on these supposed curves.
Okay, so you can see some of the complicated
issues that are related to this notion. But
this is a course in foundations of mathematics,
and so these kinds of issues are bread and butter
for us—we're going to want to examine this in
great detail. We want to get this right. Most
of modern mathematics tries to hurry-scurry
its way past these foundational issues—quick,
quick, quick, do it very fast, then we'll talk
about something else. Not us. We're interested
in going very slowly, very carefully, making
sure we understand what exactly is going on.
Next time, I'm going to introduce an important
idea that will be necessary for us to really
understand what a curve is. I'm going to talk
about the difference between 20th-century
mathematics and 21st-century mathematics.
20th-century mathematics is behind us;
21st-century mathematics is largely in the
future. There's going to be a big difference,
and I'm going to talk about an aspect of
what I believe that big difference is—the
difference between object-oriented mathematics
and expression-oriented mathematics. Then we're
going to see that that's quite pertinent to this
question of how exactly do we go about setting
out what a curve is, what an algebraic curve
is, and how we do calculus with such things.
So, I hope you'll join me for that. I'm
Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]